docs/enclave-runtime-baseline.md, before:

# Enclave Runtime Baseline (SEC-002)

## Purpose

This runbook defines the baseline enclave runtime process for Phase I and the smoke checks required by SEC-002.

## Service Contract

The enclave runtime is a separate process (`backend/crates/enclave-runtime`) that exposes:

1. `GET /healthz`
2. `GET /v1/attestation/document`

API and worker startup now perform a fail-closed connectivity probe against these endpoints.

## Local Development (Dev Shim)

Prerequisites:

1. `.env` from `.env.example`
2. `ENCLAVE_RUNTIME_BASE_URL=http://127.0.0.1:8181`
3. `ALFRED_ENV=local`
4. `ENCLAVE_RUNTIME_MODE=dev-shim`
5. `TEE_ATTESTATION_REQUIRED=false`
6. `TEE_ALLOW_INSECURE_DEV_ATTESTATION=true`

Start enclave runtime:

```bash
scripts/enclave-runtime/start-local.sh
```

Smoke check:

```bash
scripts/enclave-runtime/smoke.sh
```

Then run host services (which will verify enclave connectivity at startup):

```bash
just api
just worker
```

Or combined:

```bash
just dev
```

## Staging / Production-Like Mode

Required guardrails:

1. `ALFRED_ENV=staging` (or `production`)
2. `ENCLAVE_RUNTIME_MODE=remote`
3. `TEE_ATTESTATION_DOCUMENT_PATH` or `TEE_ATTESTATION_DOCUMENT` is set
4. `TEE_ATTESTATION_REQUIRED=true`
5. `TEE_ALLOW_INSECURE_DEV_ATTESTATION=false`

In staging/production environments, `ENCLAVE_RUNTIME_MODE=dev-shim` and `ENCLAVE_RUNTIME_MODE=disabled` are rejected by config validation.

## Packaging and Startup Path

Build enclave runtime artifact:

```bash
cd backend
cargo build -p enclave-runtime
```

Run enclave runtime artifact:

```bash
cd backend
cargo run -p enclave-runtime
```

## Verification Checklist

1. Enclave runtime process is running as a distinct binary/process.
2. `GET /healthz` returns `200`.
3. `GET /v1/attestation/document` returns `200` with JSON payload.
4. API starts successfully with enclave connectivity check enabled.
5. Worker starts successfully with enclave connectivity check enabled.

Commit message:

Implement challenge-bound enclave attestation verification for SEC-003

docs/enclave-runtime-baseline.md, after:

# Enclave Runtime Baseline (SEC-002)

## Purpose

This runbook defines the baseline enclave runtime process for Phase I and the smoke checks required by SEC-002.

## Service Contract

The enclave runtime is a separate process (`backend/crates/enclave-runtime`) that exposes:

1. `GET /healthz`
2. `GET /v1/attestation/document`
3. `POST /v1/attestation/challenge`

API and worker startup now perform a fail-closed connectivity probe against these endpoints.

## Local Development (Dev Shim)

Prerequisites:

1. `.env` from `.env.example`
2. `ENCLAVE_RUNTIME_BASE_URL=http://127.0.0.1:8181`
3. `ALFRED_ENV=local`
4. `ENCLAVE_RUNTIME_MODE=dev-shim`
5. `TEE_ATTESTATION_REQUIRED=false`
6. `TEE_ALLOW_INSECURE_DEV_ATTESTATION=true`
7. (optional) `TEE_ATTESTATION_SIGNING_PRIVATE_KEY` for custom dev signing identity

Start enclave runtime:

```bash
scripts/enclave-runtime/start-local.sh
```

Smoke check:

```bash
scripts/enclave-runtime/smoke.sh
```

Then run host services (which will verify enclave connectivity at startup):

```bash
just api
just worker
```

Or combined:

```bash
just dev
```

## Staging / Production-Like Mode

Required guardrails:

1. `ALFRED_ENV=staging` (or `production`)
2. `ENCLAVE_RUNTIME_MODE=remote`
3. `TEE_ATTESTATION_DOCUMENT_PATH` or `TEE_ATTESTATION_DOCUMENT` is set
4. `TEE_ATTESTATION_REQUIRED=true`
5. `TEE_ALLOW_INSECURE_DEV_ATTESTATION=false`
6. `TEE_ATTESTATION_SIGNING_PRIVATE_KEY` is configured

In staging/production environments, `ENCLAVE_RUNTIME_MODE=dev-shim` and `ENCLAVE_RUNTIME_MODE=disabled` are rejected by config validation.

## Packaging and Startup Path

Build enclave runtime artifact:

```bash
cd backend
cargo build -p enclave-runtime
```

Run enclave runtime artifact:

```bash
cd backend
cargo run -p enclave-runtime
```

## Verification Checklist

1. Enclave runtime process is running as a distinct binary/process.
2. `GET /healthz` returns `200`.
3. `GET /v1/attestation/document` returns `200` with JSON payload.
4. `POST /v1/attestation/challenge` returns `200` with signed challenge-bound evidence.
5. API starts successfully with enclave connectivity check enabled.
6. Worker starts successfully with enclave connectivity check enabled.
